JUDY WOODRUFF: Good
evening. I'm Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight:
a looming deadline to
pass a health care bill.
Republicans scramble
to rally votes, but many
senators on both sides of the
aisle say they, and the public,
are being kept in the dark.
Then: a tragic homecoming.
American Otto Warmbier
dies after being flown
in a coma out of North
Korea -- what it means for U.S.
relations with the Asian country
and for the three Americans
still being held there.
Plus, young people and
social media. One school
district wades into the
tricky task of monitoring
online activity without
infringing on students' privacy.
CHAD MARLOW, American
Civil Liberties Union:
It is very important to
draw the line between
punishing an action that occurs
on social media vs. thoughts
that are expressed on social
media.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And Jeffrey Brown
gets a glimpse into the life
of author and comedian David
Sedaris through his series
of autobiographical essays.
DAVID SEDARIS, Author, "Theft
By Finding": It used to be
about just racking up laughs,
right? But I think you need
some, like, sorrow to give
the laughter a bit of weight.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's "PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: The battle
over tax cuts is heating up.
The speaker of the House of
Representatives, Paul Ryan,
promised today that Republicans
are moving full-speed
ahead, despite divisions
over the issue.
In a Washington speech,
he said the GOP majorities
in Congress must press for
he called transformational
tax reform.
REP. PAUL RYAN (R-WI), Speaker
of the House: We have to get
this done in 2017. We cannot
let this once-in-a-generation
moment slip by. Yes,
the defenders of the
status quo -- and
there are many of them -- they
are counting on us to lose
our nerve, to fall back, or
put this off altogether, but
we will not wait for a path
free of obstacles. Guess what?
It doesn't exist.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In turn, Senate
Democrats warned that they may
balk at raising the national
debt ceiling if Republicans
push for new tax
breaks for the wealthy.
Voters in Atlanta's northern
suburbs went to the polls today
in a special election that
is now the most expensive
race ever for a seat in the
U.S. House. Total spending in
the contest between Republican
Karen Handel and Democrat Jon
Ossoff reached at least $50
million.
The seat came open when Tom
Price took the job of secretary
of health and human services
for President Trump. It has
been in GOP hands since 1979.
There's been another incident
over Syria. An American fighter
plane shot down an Iranian-made
armed drone overnight. U.S.
officials say it was flying
near a U.S. training camp along
the Syrian-Jordan border. On
Sunday, American planes downed a
Syrian military jet that bombed
near U.S.-backed rebels.
Russia, in turn, warned it
would target coalition planes.
Today, at the United Nations,
Secretary-General Antonio
Guterres urged restraint.
ANTONIO GUTERRES, United Nations
Secretary-General: These kind of
incidents can be very dangerous
in a conflict situation in
which there are so many actors
and in which the situation
is so complex on the ground,
so, indeed, I am concerned.
And I hope that this will not
lead to any escalation of
the conflict that is already
as dramatic as it is.
JUDY WOODRUFF: One of the
U.S. coalition members,
Australia, announced today
that it has suspended
airstrikes in Syria for now.
The United States and Russia
traded accusations today over
another incident. This one came
Monday over the Baltic Sea. The
Pentagon says that a Russian
fighter jet swooped within
a few feet of an American
reconnaissance plane in the air.
The Russians say the U.S. plane
swerved too close to their jet.
Back in this country,
brand-new federal statistics
find the opioid abuse crisis
is swamping hospitals.
According to the report,
there were nearly 1.3
million emergency room
visits and in-patient
stays for opioid problems in
2014. The emergency visits were
up 64 percent from 2005, while
in-patient stays nearly
doubled. Officials say the
epidemic is still getting worse.
The Atlantic hurricane season
is only three weeks' old, and
already, the Gulf Coast is
bracing for a hit. Tropical
Storm Cindy formed today and
should reach the Texas-Louisiana
border region late tomorrow
night. A foot of rain could
fall as far east as the Florida
Panhandle.
The rain was already falling,
and the sea churning today
in New Orleans. Mayor Mitch
Landrieu urged
people to get ready.
MITCH LANDRIEU (D), Mayor of
New Orleans, Louisiana: And we
have been through this many,
many times before. I don't want
anybody to panic. There's no
reason to do that. But this
is going to be a serious event.
We could get lucky, and it
could turn out to be nothing.
We don't expect that's going
to happen. It could be one
to three inches, or it could
be three to 12. And if those
bands hit us the wrong way
intimately over time, then we
could have some
serious flooding.
JUDY WOODRUFF: At the same
time, Tropical Storm Bret
weakened to a tropical wave, as
it blew across the
Southern Caribbean.
Meanwhile, the Southwestern
U.S. is seeing one of its worst
heat waves in years on this
first day of summer.
Temperatures reached
to near 120 degrees in
Phoenix today for the
first time in 22 years. The
conditions are also tough on
fire crews battling wildfires
in Southern California
and elsewhere. Helicopters
and tanker planes have
reduced their loads
because the superheated
air is thinner.
Wall Street cooled off some
today, as falling oil prices
took the broader market lower.
The Dow Jones industrial average
lost nearly 62 points to close
at 21467. The Nasdaq fell
51, and the S&P 500 slipped 16.
And a cultural note. Barbie's
longtime companion doll, Ken,
has a new look -- 15 of them, in
fact. Toymaker Mattel unveiled
the revamped dolls today with
a range of body types, skin
tones and hair styles,
from cornrows to man
buns. Ken's makeover
follows a similar effort
to make Barbie's image
more realistic and diverse.
It's about time.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
two U.S. senators weigh in on
the prospects for replacing
Obamacare; what an American's
death means for U.S. relations
with North Korea; the fine
line between monitoring
students' social media
and invading their
privacy; and much more.
The effort by Senate Republicans
to replace the Affordable Care
Act picked up steam today,
as their leader promised
a first look at their bill
before the end of the week.
So far, Democrats remain unable
to stop it on their own. But
they mounted a public relations
attack as Republicans
counted votes.
The word came from Majority
Leader Mitch McConnell
that a draft of the
Senate GOP's health care
package was on its way.
SEN. MITCH MCCONNELL (R-KY),
Majority Leader: Well, we're
going to lay out a discussion
draft Thursday morning. And I
wouldn't want to compare it to
the House bill. It will speak
for itself. It'll be different,
and take a different approach
based upon these endless
discussions we have had
with the only people
interested in changing the
law, which is Republican
senators.
JUDY WOODRUFF: He spoke as
Democrats, in the minority, were
making their own symbolic stand
on health care on the
Senate floor. Minority
Leader Chuck Schumer
quoted what the president
reportedly said about the House
health care bill to attack
Republican efforts broadly.
SEN. CHUCK SCHUMER (D-NY),
Minority Leader: For once, on
the topic of health care, I find
myself agreeing with the
president. His health care bill
is mean. Cutting Medicaid to the
bone is mean.
WOMAN: This is an insult
to the American people.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Democrats and
their allies held the Senate
floor yesterday well into
the night, and took Republicans
to task for keeping their
work behind closed doors.
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS
(I), Vermont: So, I
say to the Republican
leadership, what are you
afraid of?
JUDY WOODRUFF: Today, the number
two Republican in the Senate,
Texas' John Cornyn, turned
the focus back to the
Democrats, charging that their
speeches were just that, talk.
SEN. JOHN CORNYN (R), Texas:
Unfortunately, they're spending
their time and energy giving
speeches to each other on the
Senate floor, and absolutely
contributing nothing toward
a solution to this problem.
JUDY WOODRUFF: No details from
the Republican discussions have
been publicly released. But
The Washington Post and others
reported that the Senate version
would make deeper Medicaid
cuts than those passed in
the House. They also would be
phased in more slowly. The House
bill calls for cutting
$800 billion over 10 years.
At the same time, senators are
also reportedly considering
offering more generous insurance
subsidies, especially for
older Americans, as well as
eliminating some, but not all,
of the taxes put in
place by Obamacare.
Whatever the eventual bill looks
like, Republicans don't expect
any Democrats to support it.
Thus, they cannot afford to
lose more than two of their own
members. Yet, some GOP senators,
like Tennessee's Bob Corker,
have said that, even up to now,
they remain out of the loop.
QUESTION: Have you seen the
Republican health care bill?
SEN. BOB CORKER (R), Tennessee:
I have not. Have you? Have you?
QUESTION: I have not.
SEN. BOB CORKER: I would have
liked, as you already know, for
this to be a more open process
and have committee hearings.
But that's not what we're doing.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Making sure that
Corker and other Republicans
not in on the drafting process
are on board is a priority
for the Republican leadership,
especially McConnell, as they
prepare for a possible
vote next week.
And just a short while ago, I
spoke with two key voices in
the Senate about this health
care debate.
John Barrasso is an
orthopedic surgeon from
Wyoming and chairman of
the Senate Republican
Policy Committee. And senator
Chris Van Hollen, a Democrat
from Maryland, he played a key
role in the House
leadership when Obamacare
was passed in 2009.
Senator Barrasso, Senator
Van Hollen, thank you
both for joining us.
Senator Barrasso, we just heard
the majority leader say that
this bill takes a different
approach than the bill
that came out of the House.
What makes it better?
SEN. JOHN BARRASSO (R),
Wyoming: Well, look, the pain of
Obamacare is getting worse every
day. We're seeing it all
across the country, as premiums
continue to go up and choices
continue to go down.
We're looking at ways
to make sure that anyone
with a preexisting
condition is protected.
We're looking for ways to
stabilize the market and
also lower the skyrocketing
cost of insurance
and then stabilize Medicaid
for the long run, because we
need a safe and secure program
there. It has to be strong,
and it's not strong now.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Senator Van
Hollen, is there any part of
that the Democrats can support?
SEN. CHRIS VAN HOLLEN (D),
Maryland: Well, Judy, of course,
we don't know what's in the
Senate Republican bill, because
it's been kept in deep secret
from the American public,
no hearings, no
amendments in committee
But Senator Cornyn, one of
the members of the Republican
leadership, said it was going
to be 80 percent like the
House bill. The House bill is
a bill that President Trump
celebrated in the Rose
Garden, but then, behind
closed doors, said was mean.
And it is mean because
it will mean 23 million
Americans who will not
have access to affordable
care who would otherwise have
it. People with preexisting
conditions will go back to being
able to be victims of
discrimination by insurance
companies. It is why
virtually every patient
advocacy organization, in
fact, I think 100 percent, are
against that legislation, and
every provider group I have
heard from is also against it.
It will provide huge tax cuts
to the wealthiest Americans. If
you're a millionaire, you are
going to get a $50,000, on
average, annual tax cut -- tell
me how that helps health care
- - and cuts Medicaid by $830
billion. This is going to
wreak havoc on our health care
system.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, let's
just take a part of that.
SEN. JOHN BARRASSO: Sure.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Senator Barrasso,
what about the Medicaid
cuts? Again, we haven't seen
what the Senate is coming up
with, but the reporting is
that it is going to be deeper
Medicaid cuts than what
the House bill had.
SEN. JOHN BARRASSO: Well, first
of all, it's hard to stand
here and hear Chris talk about
a bill he hasn't seen -- he will
see it Thursday - - and make a
number of attacks against it,
when, in his own state of
Maryland, insurance rates asked
for, for next are going up 58
percent.
I don't know how somebody
with a straight face can call
that affordable. And they went
up 24 percent last year. And
the president of the Maryland
care -- the care -- insurance
company has said we're in the
beginning of the throes of a
death spiral of insurance.
They have lost $600
million. Obamacare has
failed in Maryland.
It's failing all across
the country. And for people
with preexisting conditions,
Judy, when you see all of these
counties across the country
where no one is even willing
to sell Obamacare insurance,
if you have a preexisting
condition and nobody
is going to be willing
to sell you insurance,
even with a subsidy, your
preexisting condition
is not covered, and
you have been deceived
by Obamacare.
SEN. CHRIS VAN HOLLEN: I'm
glad John brought that up.
Yes, Blue Cross/Blue Shield, the
largest insurer in the state of
Maryland, asked for a whopping
50 percent increase. Here's what
the president of Blue Cross/Blue
Shield told us, that well
over half of that increase
is due to deliberate
sabotage by the Trump
administration and cuts
Republicans made to
Obamacare/Affordable
Care Act payments.
A full 20 percent of the
increase they're asking for is
because the president issued
an executive order on the first
day of his administration saying
that they wouldn't enforce
the individual
mandate provision.
You tell people they don't
have to join, including
healthier people, it
means sicker people will
pay a lot more. And, by the
way, that's why AARP is on the
warpath against this health
care bill, because they're
going to see dramatic increases.
And, yes, John, I have not
seen the Senate bill. Neither
has the country, which is a
shame on the democratic process.
And, finally, John didn't answer
your specific question about
Medicaid, which has nothing
to do with the exchanges. It's
a whopping cut. I know his
state of Wyoming didn't take
the Medicaid expansion, but
this will wreak havoc on tens
of millions of Americans.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Senator Barrasso,
what about the point he made
about the criticism that
it's what Republicans have
done that have undermined
Obamacare, but also the Medicaid
question?
SEN. JOHN BARRASSO:
Well, you know, insurance
company executives
prior to the election,
prior to the November election
were saying they're thinking
of pulling out in 2018, so
this is nothing new.
Had Hillary Clinton gotten
elected president of the United
States, we'd be having to make
major changes to Obamacare,
trying to clean up the mess that
has been created by the Obama
health care law. That's where
we are right now. The current
status is not sustainable.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What
about the Republican
bill, though, Senator?
SEN. JOHN BARRASSO: We're
working on it in the Senate is
a different way to deal with
Medicaid to make sure that
states that did expand, because
there are a number of states
that did and states that didn't,
that states that did will
have a smoother glide path to
getting to the point where,
for anyone on Medicaid in those
states, they're reimbursed
the same way as was set
up initially for people
who are disabled, blind,
the elderly and children.
That's who Medicaid was set up
for originally. Plus, I was in
the state Senate in Wyoming,
and I will tell you, Judy, we
always felt, if we had more
control of that money, rather
than the one-size-fits-all
that comes out of Washington,
we could have helped a lot
more people in a lot better
ways with -- given some of the
flexibility and the freedom of
choice that a state has,
instead of having to listen
to the mandates of Washington.
And as to Chris' point of
the individual mandate,
it is the most hated
part of Obamacare. And
the judges that say, how do they
count the numbers, they say, if
you get rid of the individual
mandate, which I am committed
to do and the Republicans did,
they say millions and millions
of people will not buy
a mandated government
product they don't think
is worth the money.
SEN. CHRIS VAN HOLLEN: The
whole idea of insurance,
as John knows, is
everybody has got to be
part of the pool. That's
the whole idea of social
insurance and health insurance.
The core of the Republican bill
in the House, and we suspect
in the Senate, is rotten. And
here's why: It cuts Medicaid
by $830 billion. That's huge.
It provides tax cuts of about
$900 billion.
You tell me how cutting taxes
to millionaires and giving them
an average tax break of $50,000
has anything to do with making
health care better. In fact,
it takes two years off of
the Medicare Trust
Fund, because, as part
of the Affordable Care
Act, we asked wealthier
Americans to put some
of their unearned income
into shoring up Medicare.
The Republicans give them a big
tax break. They hurt millions
of Americans in the process.
And it is a bad deal.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Senator Barrasso,
what about those tax cuts
for wealthier Americans that
would be realized
under -- presumably,
under the Senate plan?
SEN. JOHN BARRASSO: That's
still part of the debate we're
having, and the bill will come
out Friday.
We want to eliminate all the
taxes that raise premiums for
people, the medical device tax,
the health insurance tax, the
tax on prescription medication.
But getting back to Medicaid,
Judy, a third of the doctors
-- and I practiced medicine
for 25 years -- a third of the
doctors in this country will
not take new Medicaid patients,
and major hospitals around the
country have said, look, if
you have to make an appointment
for somebody either
with Medicaid or who has
traditional insurance,
don't give that appointment
to somebody with Medicaid --
this is what the Mayo Clinic
said -- because we have reached
a tipping point where
we can't continue even
paying the salaries at
the rate that Medicaid
reimburses.
Medicaid is failing. We need to
strengthen it for the long term.
SEN. CHRIS VAN HOLLEN: So, their
answer is, it's failing, so
cut it by another $180 billion.
It's not sufficient to
completely reimburse
doctors now, so give
them even less, while
you're giving tax breaks to
the very wealthy. That's nuts.
And I think the American people
know it. I think that's why
this has been kept in secret
in the Senate for so long.
I hope that, at long last,
we will have a chance to
have a debate on this.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, just finally,
to both of you, when the
public is told that the Senate
version is going to stabilize
the health care coverage in
this country, quickly, Senator
Barrasso, how does it do that?
SEN. JOHN BARRASSO: Well,
there are a number of different
provisions to do exactly that,
to help people at a significant
high risk of high medical costs.
It's worked successfully around
the country. And part of it is
to just give more flexibility
to the states, so they can
make decisions about what
insurance can be bought and sold
in those states to allow people
to get what they want and they
need and is right for their
family, not what the Democrats
who voted for Obamacare
said they have to have.
SEN. CHRIS VAN HOLLEN: Well,
listen, Judy, there are issues
with some of the exchanges.
We can fix them. There
are commonsense things
you can do about that,
rather than blow them
up.
And with respect to Medicaid
-- and, in Maryland,
I can tell you, of the
people who are directly
benefiting from the Affordable
Care Act, more than half are
from Medicaid. And John hasn't
said anything that's going to
explain how those people are
going to be better off when
they cut $830 billion
or whatever amount
they're going to cut from
the Medicaid program.
Medicaid already has lots of
waivers. It already has lots of
flexibility. We're using it in
the state of Maryland. His
state of Wyoming did not take
the expansion, so maybe, you
know, that's something he
doesn't feel strongly about.
But I can tell you we're hearing
from Republican governors in
states that have, and they're
saying do not do that kind of
damage to the Medicaid program.
SEN. JOHN BARRASSO: Somebody
may have a Medicaid card, but
it doesn't mean they get to see
a doctor.
SEN. CHRIS VAN HOLLEN: Yes, I
can tell you, when they take
$830 million away from them
and give it to wealthier
Americans, they are not going to
be better off. They are going
to be a lot worse off.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Gentlemen, thank
you very much. We're going to
get our first peek at the bill
on Thursday.
Senator Chris Van Hollen,
Senator John Barrasso,
we thank you both.
SEN. JOHN BARRASSO:
Thank you for having us.
SEN. CHRIS VAN
HOLLEN: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now to the
quiet and tragic end to the
sad story of Otto Warmbier, and
the implications for the United
States' dealings with his
former captors in North Korea.
John Yang has that.
JOHN YANG: Speaking in
the Oval Office, President
Trump condemned the
death of Otto Warmbier,
who had been detained in
North Korea for nearly
a year-and-a-half.
DONALD TRUMP, President of the
United States: It's a total
disgrace, what happened to Otto.
It should never, ever
be allowed to happen.
JOHN YANG: Mr. Trump
also indirectly blamed
the Obama administration
for not getting him
home sooner.
DONALD TRUMP: He should have
brought home that same day.
The result would have been
a lot different.
JOHN YANG: The president's
spokesman said Warmbier's death
casts a shadow on Mr. Trump's
stated willingness to talk to
his North Korean counterpart
under the right conditions.
SEAN SPICER, White House Press
Secretary: Clearly, we're
moving further away, not closer
to those conditions
being enacted.
JOHN YANG: Later, the president
seemed to abandon his goal of
enlisting China to pressure
North Korea: "While I greatly
appreciate the efforts of
President Xi and China to help
with North Korea, it has
not worked out. At least
I know China tried."
North Korea's release of
the 22-year-old Warmbier
has increased, not eased
tensions with Pyongyang.
He arrived in Ohio last week in
a coma. Doctors said Warmbier
suffered a severe neurological
injury with extensive loss
of brain tissue, likely as a
result of a lack of blood to his
brain.
DR. DANIEL KANTER, University
of Cincinnati Health: A state
of unresponsive wakefulness.
JOHN YANG: He'd been sentenced
in March 2016 to 15 years hard
labor for allegedly taking
a propaganda poster from a
Pyongyang hotel. In a statement,
Warmbier's parents said, "The
awful, torturous mistreatment
our son received at the hands
of the North Koreans ensured
that no other outcome
was possible."
In an interview broadcast today
on CBS News, newly-elected
South Korean President Moon
Jae-in joined in
condemning the North.
MOON JAE-IN, South Korean
President (through translator):
I believe we must now have the
perception that North Korea
is an irrational regime.
JOHN YANG: Moon, who had
campaigned on engaging
North Korea, said all
options are on the table.
MOON JAE-IN (through
translator): When it comes
to preemptive strike,
which you mentioned,
I believe that this is something
we may be able to discuss
at a later stage, when the
threat has become
even more urgent.
JOHN YANG: North Korea
still holds three other
Americans as prisoners.
Today, a pair of U.S. B-1B
bombers, like these, flew
over South Korea, just
below the demilitarized
zone, in a show of force.
So, what effect will the
death of Otto Warmbier
have on the wider, and
seemingly intractable,
question of how the United
States should deal with North
Korea? What options are left?
To probe those questions
and more, we turn to veteran
diplomat Kathleen Stephens. She
was U.S. ambassador to South
Korea from 2008 to 2011. She's
now at Stanford University.
And that's where she
joins us tonight.
Ambassador Stephens, thank you.
What about that question?
Is this tragic story
of Otto Warmbier going
to affect, have any
impact on the way the United
States approaches North Korea?
KATHLEEN STEPHENS, Former U.S.
Ambassador to South Korea:
Well, I certainly think it's
a reminder to us that the threat
and the danger that North Korea
poses, not just to the United
States, but to the region and
the world, goes even beyond
its nuclear missile programs,
which we have been so
rightly focused on in
recent weeks and months.
I also need to add, I myself
want to just express my deepest
condolences to the Warmbier
family and to all the
friends, and I know there
are many, and family of Otto.
The treatment that he received
while under North Korean
custody for a year-and-a-half
was appalling and outrageous.
And I think the North Koreans
owe a full explanation to
his family and to the United
States of what happened.
JOHN YANG: Does the approach,
is it complicated by the fact
that there are three Americans
still being held?
KATHLEEN STEPHENS: Well,
I think it concentrates
the mind certainly of
the United States, and
I hope in Pyongyang as well,
that this is untenable.
And I would hope that, in the
coming days - - and I believe
this will happen -- that
there will be a renewed pressure
and effort to win the release
of these three Americans
who are being held.
There are others of other
nationalities as well.
North Korea in an area of
allowing access to foreigners
who have been arrested while
in North Korea, which it is
obligated to do under standard
diplomatic procedure, it hasn't
met those obligations,
as it doesn't meet its
obligations in other areas.
It needs to do that. But it
really needs to move -- to
stop this practice of holding,
arresting and holding
citizens, not allowing
their representatives
from their countries
to have access to them, and
often using them as or hoping
to use them as leverage to -- as
hostages, essentially,
and as bargaining chips.
It needs to stop. It
needs to be a part of
our overall approach
and effort. It has been,
but it needs to be reemphasized
going forward that this too
is part of the effort to get
North Korea to live up to
some minimal standards of
international behavior.
JOHN YANG: Live up to some
minimal standards. We have had
sanctions in place for a long
time. We have had
people describe it as
an irrational regime.
What are the real pressure
points on North Korea? What
can make a difference to North
Korea?
KATHLEEN STEPHENS: Well, it is
a very challenging question.
I think one thing that
remains very important
is, notwithstanding maybe
some welcome realism
about perhaps the limits of
what China can or will do,
China does remain an important
actor in this, as
does South Korea.
So, I think, with meetings
coming up tomorrow in
Washington -- Secretary
Tillerson and Mattis
will be meeting with their
Chinese counterparts. Next week,
the new South Korean president,
Moon Jae-in, will be meeting
with President Trump.
Clearly, North Korea will
be very much on the agenda,
but, in the context of what's
happened, these are going to
be even more somber meetings.
And I think the effort will
be to look both at better
implementation of the pressure
and sanctions now in effect,
and also into some new ones that
might bring greater pressure
to get North Korea to take
a different path and a path that
will lead to some discussion
of how it can meet its
international obligations.
JOHN YANG: President Moon,
of course, ran on a campaign
talking about engagement with
North Korea. He wanted to go
to the -- to pressure North
Korea to the negotiating table,
while President Trump talks
about pressuring North Korea to
get rid of its nuclear program.
What are the chances
or the likelihood that
these two leaders can
find a common approach
to North Korea when they meet
here in Washington next week?
KATHLEEN STEPHENS: Well, it's
their very first meeting.
They're both very new in office,
President Moon in particular.
And I think a lot is
going to depend on the
kind of relationship
and rapport they're able
to establish with each other.
President Trump established a
good rapport with the Japanese
prime minister, of course,
with the Chinese president, Mr.
Xi, although today he seemed
to be a little bit
disappointed in him.
So I think, one, the personal
relationship is going to be
important. But, two, I think
it will be important for
President Moon to explain the
South Korean perspective. The
South Koreans actually over
many decades have seen thousands
and thousands of their citizens
abducted and held in the North,
and six are being held right
now just within recent months
and years.
So, this is a heartfelt
issue for South Korea,
as well, as well as, of
course, the continuing
security threat of North Korea.
So, they're under no illusions
about the threat. The challenge
will be, as you suggest, how
to harmonize these approaches
and also harmonize them with
China's approach in the region,
which certainly sees the need
for a change in behavior in
North Korea, but they're
worried about instability.
It's not going to be easy,
but having these meetings
is an important first step.
JOHN YANG: Ambassador Kathleen
Stephens, thanks for joining us.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
improving health care in the
nation's most rural communities;
and from the "NewsHour"
Bookshelf, humorist
David Sedaris and his
book of autobiographical
essays.
But first: Schools are
paying a lot more attention
to what students post
online, and that can
have severe consequences
for students and schools.
Harvard University
withdrew the admittance
of at least 10 incoming
freshmen who had reportedly
posted violent, racist and
sexually explicit content
in a private Facebook group.
High schools are cracking down,
too, with some hiring outside
companies to police social
media posts.
But monitoring online behavior
is difficult, and civil
rights groups are watching.
Special correspondent Lisa
Stark with our partner Education
Week visited a school district
in Arizona.
LISA STARK: It's just before
summer break at Dysart High
School in Surprise, Arizona,
outside Phoenix. Students are
eating lunch, signing yearbooks,
and they're immersed in
social media.
Facebook, Twitter, Snapchat,
Instagram, YouTube. More than
90 percent of teens say they go
online every day, and
nearly a quarter are
online almost constantly.
Let me ask you, first of
all, do you all have phones?
STUDENT: Yes.
STUDENT: Yes, we do.
LISA STARK: Do you ever
not have a phone with you?
STUDENT: No.
STUDENT: It's always on.
LISA STARK: We sat down with
four Dysart students to talk
about how they use social media.
Snapchat, I post every single
day, like, every day, all day.
STUDENT: I always like
post my thoughts, certain
way I'm feeling. Depends
on how I'm feeling
that day.
STUDENT: When I'm done with all
my work, and if I don't have
any work from other classes,
I just go on my phone
and see what's going on.
STUDENT: I don't really care
who sees it. Like, I'm just
posting it because I think
it's public. Like,
I'm open about it.
LISA STARK: The problem for
schools, what happens on social
media doesn't always stay
on social media.
STUDENT: I see a lot of bullying
on Facebook that it transfers
to the school. And then,
like, at the beginning of
this year, this girl got into
an altercation on Facebook,
and she ended up fighting
the girl at school.
AMY HARTJEN, Principal, Dysart
High School: When something's
posted on social media and
it's being talked about
on campus and it disrupts
learning, that's when
we have to step in and
decide if there's something
that we need to react to.
LISA STARK: Nationwide, a
growing number of districts are
watching what's posted online
for anything that might
impact their schools.
Principal Amy Hartjen says the
number one concern is safety.
What's like, OK, we have to
get involved here? Bullying,
would that be a red line?
AMY HARTJEN: Absolutely,
threats, intimidations.
LISA STARK: What if
someone posts something
that is offensive
language, racist, sexist?
AMY HARTJEN: Absolutely.
LISA STARK: Really? And why
would that be a red line?
AMY HARTJEN: Because that
is just -- it's against
the campus culture.
LISA STARK: Students threatening
to harm others or themselves
sometimes telegraph that on
social media, and districts
have been sued for not paying
attention to online posts.
These days, the schoolyard
has new boundaries.
ZACHERY FOUNTAIN, Dysart
District Communications
Chief: The information
space is just as important
as the physical space anymore,
because it has that ability
to snowball at a really rapid
pace.
LISA STARK: Zachery
Fountain is the Dysart
District Communications
Chief, and point man
on social media. He
trains staff on how to
document troublesome posts.
ZACHERY FOUNTAIN: That's
teaching them things like asking
for a screen shot of what has
happened, understanding that
a message could disappear in
five seconds, as soon as it's
brought to their
attention by a student.
LISA STARK: Nationwide,
both public and private
schools keep tabs on
social media in a variety
of ways: hiring firms
to actively monitor
students' accounts,
encouraging students to
report anything worrisome,
friending students to
gain access to posts
that may not be public,
and through simple alerts
every time the district
and its schools are
mentioned in any type
of media.
There's anecdotal evidence, but
no hard data, to show that early
identification of troubling
social media posts can help
schools head off problems.
School officials here insist
they are most concerned about
safety. They're not trying
to pry into students' lives.
But civil rights and privacy
groups say it can be a slippery
slope and that some
districts have gone too
far, that they have violated
students' constitutional
rights.
Students have been disciplined
for liking other posts, for
private online chats that
others made public, for
forwarding racist posts, even
in order to denounce them.
CHAD MARLOW, American Civil
Liberties Union: Schools need
to think about, how do we take
on these issues in an
appropriate way that
doesn't have kind of
the collateral damage
effect of destroying students'
privacy and free speech rights?
LISA STARK: Chad Marlow is with
the American Civil Liberties
Union. He says, first and
foremost, school shouldn't
have open-ended access to
students' social media accounts.
You're saying no
fishing expeditions?
CHAD MARLOW: No fishing
expeditions. And the
way to do that is by
not allowing passwords
to be turned over, what we call
shoulder surfing. Log onto your
account, and the teacher will
stand over the student's
shoulder and say,
scroll, scroll, scroll.
LISA STARK: Are you asking
students for passwords?
WENDY KLARKOWSKI, School
Resource Officer: No.
LISA STARK: Or log-in
information or anything?
WENDY KLARKOWSKI: No.
LISA STARK: School resource
officer Wendy Klarkowski is
assigned to Shadow Ridge High
School in the Dysart district.
Her morning routine includes
searching for school-related
posts on social media. She's
uncovered criminal activity.
WENDY KLARKOWSKI: A young
man had decided to bring some
marijuana-laced brownies to
school, and he advertised
them on Twitter and, meet me
in the cafeteria. We got him
with all the brownies
still on him.
LISA STARK: And possible
campus disruptions.
WENDY KLARKOWSKI: Some kids
were going to protest something
they thought was unfair,
and it was all over Twitter,
so we were able to get the kids
that were leading it, actually,
the night before, so that
they put an end to that, so
it didn't disrupt the campus.
LISA STARK: But why isn't
that their free speech right
to protest something they're
not happy about?
WENDY KLARKOWSKI: It is
their right to protest,
but it is not their right
to disturb an educational
institution.
LISA STARK: The ACLU's Marlow
worries about districts
stifling free speech.
CHAD MARLOW: It is very
important to draw the line
between punishing an action that
occurs on social media vs.
thoughts that are expressed on
social media. Once you start
policing and punishing
thoughts, you are into very,
very dangerous territory.
LISA STARK: Two of the Dysart
students we spoke with say they
tread more carefully online
after each posted a
disparaging remark about
one of their teachers.
STUDENT: I made a reference to
one of my teachers last year
on Facebook, and I almost got a
referral for it, for what I
said about her. And then me and
the teacher ended up talking,
and now she's my
favorite teacher ever.
HADIN KHAN, Student: It
was funny at first. Then
I was like, OK, I need
to take some precautions
for next time, when I'm angry
about something, not mention
names or anything. I could say
English teacher, as opposed
to saying their name.
LISA STARK: So, you
are censoring yourself
in a way, right?
HADIN KHAN: Yes, kind of. Yes.
LISA STARK: How do you feel
about having to do that?
HADIN KHAN: I don't really
have a problem with it, because
it's not that serious of
an issue.
LISA STARK: Superintendent Gail
Pletnick insists the district
is careful not to violate free
speech or privacy rights.
GAIL PLETNICK, Superintendent,
Dysart Unified School District:
We're not crossing that line.
We're not monitoring people
24/7. We're not the social media
police. But we are concerned
about anything that we feel
will be harmful to our students.
LISA STARK: Pletnick says
technology changes so quickly
that schools can find themselves
operating in a gray area.
GAIL PLETNICK: Those laws,
those rules, those guidelines
that we're going to have to use
are being developed. So,
we're really not only flying
this plane while we build it,
while it's being designed.
LISA STARK: It can be
a rough ride, so Dysart
and other districts are
increasingly starting
to teach digital
citizenship, the responsible
use of technology, to
impress upon students
to think before they click.
STUDENT: I like
that. That's cute.
LISA STARK: For the "PBS
NewsHour" and Education
Week, I'm Lisa Stark
in Surprise, Arizona.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Fifty percent
of health care spending in
the U.S. can be traced to just
5 percent of the population.
Those are the sickest and often
poorest Americans who spend
much of their time
cycling in and out of
costly emergency care.
While congressional leaders
square off toward a vote next
week on the future of the health
care law, there are pilot
projects on the ground that
are focused on how to improve
treating this group of patients
and also to save money.
That's even the case in remote
areas.
Special correspondent
Jackie Judd has our report
from Kalispell, Montana.
JACKIE JUDD: Not so long ago,
Sheran Greene and her beloved
dog were living in a car in
downtown Kalispell, Montana,
and routinely heading to the
local emergency room because
of chronic lung disease and the
need for an electrical outlet.
SHERAN GREENE, Patient: I
was there like clockwork
every day, sometimes
being treated, sometimes
having to charge up my oxygen
machine, which I used, because
I had no electricity, sometimes
just getting out of the cold.
JACKIE JUDD: It is this cycle
of patients going in and out
of the hospital, at great
cost, with not much benefit,
that the group around this
table is trying to break.
WOMAN: How can we avoid some
of these emergency room visits
that really are not necessary?
JACKIE JUDD: A pilot program
funded by the federal government
and a foundation began
late last year in Kalispell,
Billings and Helena.
WOMAN: How are you?
WOMAN: Tired.
JACKIE JUDD: Health care players
already in the community now
team up in a very deliberate
way to identify high-needs
patients and to go well
beyond the traditional
bounds of medical
care.
LARA SHADWICK, Mountain-Pacific
Quality Health: Do you think
you can find housing that'll
take your Section 8 voucher?
WOMAN: Oh, yes.
JACKIE JUDD: Lara Shadwick
directs the Montana program.
LARA SHADWICK: Some of the
themes really rest on social
determinants of health, lack of
transportation, housing
insecurity, food insecurity,
economics, finances.
Those are really some
of the drivers that
are the commonalities
for these patients.
JACKIE JUDD: The Kalispell
care team runs lean. There
are community health workers,
like Jane Emmert, who are
trained to manage non-medical
issues works, and the head of
the team, registered
nurse Lesly Starling.
Together, they aim to reset the
paths these patients are on.
LESLY STARLING, Kalispell
Regional Healthcare: They're so
sick. They have gotten so used
to the way that they live. I
do feel like that patients get
very used to their environment,
and they get very used to their
choices. They get very used
to their lifestyle. And it's
not -- it's almost like
they build up an immunity to
what their life looks like.
JACKIE JUDD: David Dixon was
once a member of an emergency
medical team and a fishing
and hunting guide. Since
a disabling motorcycle
accident, he struggles
with chronic pain and
nausea, overuse of
medications and episodes
of depression and anxiety.
In a 14-month period, Dixon
went to the E.R. 42 times.
DAVID DIXON, Patient: I just
want to have a better life.
I want to be able to wake up
in the morning and have a
halfway decent day. I would like
to be able to make plans for
tomorrow morning.
JACKIE JUDD: In just a few
weeks, the team has helped
Dixon to reconnect with a pain
specialist and link him up to
a pharmacist to sort out the
many medications he is on.
WOMAN: Are you taking that
one also pretty regularly?
DAVID DIXON: There's so many
medicines I'm taking, that I
don't know which ones are really
helping and which ones
aren't at this point.
WOMAN: OK.
JACKIE JUDD: Dixon,
like so many high-needs
patients, has mental
health issues. Specialists
in Kalispell are in short
supply, so Starling typically
gets advice from an expert some
distance away about how
best to work with patients.
MAN: It sounds like you have
been using a lot of those, some
of the motivational interviewing
skills that we have been
talking about, finding
what kind of barriers
there are for him, finding
what his goals are.
JACKIE JUDD: Sometimes, a
patient's need is as basic
as a roof over one's head.
The team found Sheran Greene
an affordable apartment, which
is no easy task in Kalispell.
Starling acts as a liaison
to Greene's primary
care doctor. And other
community workers literally
deliver Greene to Dr.
Jonathan Anderson's door.
DR. JONATHAN ANDERSON,
Greene's Physician: Good.
SHERAN GREENE: So,
do I have a heart?
DR. JONATHAN ANDERSON:
It's still beating.
She's allowing people into
her life, is what she's doing.
Before, it was basically the
E.R. and the hospital, and then
she'd come in for follow-up
visits here, and then she'd
bounce around and come back.
Now she's allowing people from
the community to come in, and
allow them to help, either help
her move things, allow them
to kind of check in on her and
make sure she's doing all right.
JACKIE JUDD: When Greene was
homeless, in one six-month
period, her Medicare charges
were $100,000. Since
November, hospital charges
are less than $6,000.
By the time this pilot program
ends, the hope is over $2
million will be saved. Programs
like these first came to urban
areas. Rolling one out in a
vast rural state like Montana
is a very different kind of
experiment, with very unique
challenges, starting with simple
geography.
JANE EMMERT, Director, ASSIST:
Sometimes, we're going on
mountainous roads that are
icy and treacherous. Sometimes,
they're narrow dirt roads that
you aren't sure that you want
to go down.
JACKIE JUDD: To get to a patient
can be a 60-mile round trip.
So Emmert frequently heads
out on her own to their homes,
as she did on this day, to
visit 25-year-old Mackenzie
Kramer, who is slowly
recovering from major surgery.
JANE EMMERT: So, if you try to
do any of this, and it's tough
for you, just know what we'd
be glad to help you fill it out.
JACKIE JUDD: Emmert is there to
help him manage the paperwork
for disability, and to put him
in touch with Starling, who
can check up on many more
patients if she stays behind in
her Kalispell office.
LESLY STARLING: How
has the pain been?
MAN: It's been manageable.
It's getting better, I think.
JACKIE JUDD: The team also
gently pushes Kramer to think
about his future once his health
stabilizes.
JANE EMMERT: He's got to have
something to look forward to.
So that's why we're looking
into possibilities with college,
or a job, that he could reclaim
the life of a 25-year-old
again.
Part of the goal is to help
you connect to things you
might not have already.
MAN: Somebody that knows
where to go, how to do it.
JACKIE JUDD: You have a
whole team of people, right?
MAN: Well, I have a
whole team of people.
JACKIE JUDD: Progress with
these patients can come in
fits and starts. Less than 24
hours after a home visit filled
with encouragement to manage
his illnesses differently, David
Dixon takes himself
back to the E.R.
WOMAN: What happened?
DAVID DIXON: I woke up nauseous
and vomiting, and took my
medicines and couldn't keep my
medicines down, so I went for
a trip to the hospital again.
JACKIE JUDD: Dixon's team
wasn't surprised that he went
to the hospital, his visit a
reminder of how fragile these
patients are and how much work
it takes to break the cycle.
DAVID DIXON: It's taken
years to get me where I
am. They're starting to
understand it. They're
starting to get programs
together that fill in
the gaps in the medical
profession, where
I had problems before.
They don't know everything.
It's not a magic wand, but
at least they're trying.
JACKIE JUDD: The pilot program
has another year to prove
these intensive interventions
can succeed, and, if so,
whether there is the funding
and the will to make them a new
standard of care for the most
challenging people to treat.
For the "NewsHour,"
this is Jackie Judd
in Kalispell, Montana.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Two quick
notes about Jackie's story.
It is not yet clear
whether the moves by the
president and Republicans
to replace the Affordable
Care Act will affect the funding
of programs like this one.
And, for the record, the Robert
Wood Johnson Foundation, which
helps to fund the Kalispell
pilot program, is also a
funder of the "NewsHour."
Finally tonight: Humorist David
Sedaris plumbs his own diaries
for his latest book showcasing
life's idiosyncrasies.
Jeffrey Brown sat down with
Sedaris recently, amidst his
performing around the country in
some 120 cities.
JEFFREY BROWN: A 60-year-old
hugely successful writer looking
back at his younger self, the
one before the millions of
books sold, the countless live
appearances before adoring
audiences and often, in
his culottes, the regular
appearances on late-night TV.
On a recent morning, we joined
David Sedaris at the archives
of La MaMa Theatre in Lower
Manhattan, one of the
small stages where he
first told stories.
In a new book titled "Theft By
Finding,MD-B" Sedaris offers
a kind of fractured portrait
of the artist behind
the stories, through
his personal diaries.
DAVID SEDARIS, Author, "Theft
By Finding": Trying this
persona on and that persona on
and, you know, trying acting,
and oh, now look, I'm trying
sculpture, and now, all the
sudden, I'm a painter. But
that you could kind of settle
on being yourself, completely
yourself, and have that be
the thing that works, is being
yourself, is, to me, incredible.
JEFFREY BROWN: Sedaris
was raised in a large
family in Raleigh,
North Carolina, and many
of his stories involve
his parents and siblings,
including sister Amy,
a well-known humorist
in her own right.
His colorfully titled story
collections, including
"Me Talk Pretty One
Day," "Dress Your Family
in Corduroy and Denim,"
and "Let's Explore
Diabetes With Owls," are
perennial bestsellers.
And NPR regularly replays
perhaps his most famous story,
"SantaLand Diaries," about the
time he worked as
an elf at Macy's.
DAVID SEDARIS: Twenty-two
thousand people came to see
Santa today, and not all of them
were well-behaved.
Today, I witnessed
fistfights and vomiting
and magnificent tantrums.
JEFFREY BROWN: That experience
appears in his diaries
beginning on October 31, 1990,
when he is told:
"Congratulations, Mr.
Sedaris. You are an elf."
So, you can't not
write and keep a diary?
DAVID SEDARIS: Well, it's funny,
because, sometimes, people
would say, oh, that's very
disciplined. But it's not a
discipline. It is a compulsion.
I should be out doing things,
but I have to write about these
people I saw at dinner the
night before. I have to write
about the bellman at my hotel.
I have to write about something
that ultimately doesn't matter
at all. But I -- I don't
know. I can't move on until I
get that down.
JEFFREY BROWN: When you
overhear something or you record
something in your diary, is
there kind of, aha, this
is something I can use?
DAVID SEDARIS: I flew here
from London. I was at Newark
Airport waiting for someone
to pick me up.
And I saw a couple, and they
were in their mid-60s. And
then she said to him, where's
the other suitcase? And he
said, what other suitcase? She
said, you left home dragging
two suitcases behind you. Now
you have got one. The other one
is mine. Where's my suitcase?
You lost my suitcase.
I thought, wow. I mean, I have
been in a similar situation,
right? And just the entire look
on her face, like, if I could
leave you now, or if I could
kill you now, I would do it.
And so I had to write about
that. Maybe one day, I would
write a story about arguing in
public, and those would
come in handy in some way.
But it's also, like, if I were
going to remember yesterday,
I flew here in an airplane and
I did this and that. But that
was really the moment yesterday
where I felt like I was living
my life, like I was in the
moment. I wasn't thinking about
the past or about the future.
I was just right there living,
visiting and listening, watching
those people have an argument.
JEFFREY BROWN: And that sense
is important to you somehow?
DAVID SEDARIS: Well, because I
spend so much time like living
in the past or the future.
I mean, I think most people
do, really. And the moments
when you're really present in
your life can be
pretty rare, really.
JEFFREY BROWN: Sedaris'
stories appear regularly
in "The New Yorker." On
the day we got together,
he was just finishing a new one.
So, in the printed stories and
on stage, you're presenting, in
some sense, a character named
David, David Sedaris,
right? Your family members,
your partner, Hugh.
Talking to you now, I'm
not sure if you think of
them as characters or you're
just writing yourself.
DAVID SEDARIS: Well, I think
people are people in real life,
but the second you put them
on page -- on the page,
they become characters.
JEFFREY BROWN: And how
worked over are your stories?
DAVID SEDARIS: Gosh, the story
that -- I sent in a draft this
morning for this "New Yorker"
story that we're closing,
and it's the 21st draft.
JEFFREY BROWN:
Twenty-first draft?
DAVID SEDARIS: Mm-hmm.
JEFFREY BROWN: Is it tinkering
over words or jokes or...
DAVID SEDARIS: It's tinkering
over words. I will go on tour
with, like, let's say three
new stories, and I will read
them and go back to the room
and rewrite them, and read them
and rewrite them.
JEFFREY BROWN: And what does
a story in the end have to
have to be successful, to work
for you?
DAVID SEDARIS: It used
to be about just racking
up laughs, right? But
I think you need, like,
some sorrow to give the laughter
a bit of weight. And that's
when you remember things.
Or that's when I
remember things.
JEFFREY BROWN: So people come
and they want - - you think
they want laughter, but you want
something more. You want
to give them something
more. What is that more?
DAVID SEDARIS: I want to
connect with them. I want them
to -- usually, it's the worst
thing you can admit about
yourself that most people
can relate to. Right?
It was so surprising to me when
I realized that, that when I
thought, well, if you write
about, say, your own jealousy,
people aren't going to think,
oh, he's a horrible person
because he's jealous. They
will think, that's me.
JEFFREY BROWN: Was there
always an ambition? Was there
always a kind of craving to not
only get to a bigger
world, but reach people?
DAVID SEDARIS: Yes. It's
all I ever wanted. It's
all I ever thought about.
When I go on tour and I'm on
stage and the lights come up
at the end and I see those
people, people say, oh, that
must be awful. You go on tour
and you go to 40 cities in
41 days. And then you have
the book signing. And that's
people standing in line to say
how much they love you.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes,
for hours sometimes.
DAVID SEDARIS: And I
don't see any part of
that that's negative.
(LAUGHTER)
DAVID SEDARIS: It's all
I ever dreamed about
like from age to 6 up.
JEFFREY BROWN: David Sedaris
will continue to tell his
stories and write his diaries
in his travels at home
and abroad this summer.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Jeffrey Brown in New York.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Online right now:
Six members of the Presidential
Advisory Council on HIV-AIDS
recently resigned, saying
President Donald Trump -- quote
-- "doesn't care about the
disease."
"PBS NewsHour"'s Pamela
Kirkland interviews one of those
members who quit the council.
You can watch that
on our Facebook page,
Facebook.com/NewsHour.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight. I'm Judy Woodruff.
Join us online and again right
here tomorrow evening. For all
of us at the "PBS NewsHour,"
thank you, and we
will see you soon.